EDA Exploratory Data Analysis
No. of sheets = 1
No. of columns = 16
No. of rows = 700
Numeric = 8
Character = 4
Dates = 4
(Year, Quater, Month, Week, Day)
Drill Down
Roll up

1) Calculate total units sold in Mexico.
SUMIF

2) Calculate total sales in Canada.
3) Calculate total profit in Germany.
4) Calculate total COGS for Government segment.

Similar to SUMIF, there is COUNTIF function to count no. of records based on certain condition.


1) Count no. of records having discount band = High

For multiple conditions, use COUNTIFS function.

1) Count no. of records for High discount band and product Paseo.
2) Count no. of records for Low discount band and product Montana and Country Germany.

To calculate average based on some condition, use AVERAGEIF function.

1) Calculate average sale price for country France.
2) Calculate average manufacturing price for 
product VTT.
3) Calculate average discount for segment Enterprise.




Count no. of records having discount 0%

Count no. of records having 10% discount in Germany and product Velo.
1) calculate standard deviation & variance of Sales.
2) calculate standard deviation & variance of Sale price.
3) calculate standard deviation & variance of manufacturing price.




Q1 - First quartile - 25% values are below this value and 75% values are above
Q2 - Second quartile (Median) - 50% values are below this value and 50% values are above
Q3 - Third quartile - 75% values are below this value and 25% values are above

Distance between Q1 & Q3 is called IQR (Inter Quartile Range) = Q3 - Q1

Upper Whisker (UW) = Q3 + (1.5 * IQR)
Lower Whisker (LW) = Q1 - (1.5 * IQR)

Any value below LW or above UW is classified as Outlier.


Measure - Any numeric column (with or without decimal) on which maths or stats functions can be applied to get meaningful result e.g. sales, profit, tax, cost etc

Dimension - Any number / date / character value which is not a measure and can be used to aggregate the measure e.g City, Country, Department, Gender, Birth date, Rating etc.


1) Profit % by Country
2) Profit % by Product
3) Total COGS by Segment
4) Avg sale price by Product
5) No. of records % by Discount Band

Correlation - It is effect of change in one numeric variable (X) on the second variable (Y). Its value ranges from -1 to +1. -1 means perfect negative correlation and +1 means perfect positive correlation. 0 indicates no correlation.

Data Consolidation

Conditional formatting
1. Set header of column A = Sales
2. Add 20 random values between 3000 to 8000
3. Calculate average of these values.
4. Use conditional formatting to set 2 colors- below average & above average
-----------------------------------
5. Set header of column B = Profit
6. Add 20 random values between -2000 to 2000
7. Use conditional formatting to set 2 colors - positive & negative

1) Using Sales & Profit values, find no. of records where Sales is above average but Profit is negative

2) Using Sales & Profit values, find no. of records where Sales is below average and Profit is positive

Set unit cost or unit price or quantity in such a combination that net profit will be 1500.

If Profit column L has positive value then print "Profit" 
If it has negative value then print "Loss"

1) Find no. of losses in Mexico.
2) Find no. of losses in Germany.
3) Find no. of losses in France.

If Month number (column N) is between 1 to 3, print "Q1"
If Month number (column N) is between 4 to 6, print "Q2"
If Month number (column N) is between 7 to 9, print "Q3"
If Month number (column N) is between 10 to 12, print "Q4"

Using columns Country & Quarter, find values for following conditions - 
1) Find average profit for Canada & Q3
2) Find total sales for France & Q1
3) Find average units sold for Mexico & Q2
4) Find no. of records in Germany for Q4.


SUMPRODUCT


Fill quantity 20 random values between 10 to 99. Fill unit price with 20 random values between 5 to 20. Fill Discount % values with 20 random values between 25 to 55 and divide it by 100.

Calculate total sales amount.



Since profit depends on COGS, Profit will be displayed on Y axis while COGS will be displayed on X axis

Profit = b0 + (b1 * COGS)
where b0 = intercept and b1 is slope

Prediction line equation =
Profit = 6894.9240 + (0.1988 * COGS)

1) using this equation, predict profit for COGS = 50000 (16835.8115)

using this equation, predict profit for COGS = 50001 (16836.0103)



2) using this equation, predict profit for COGS = 75000 (21806.2529)
3) using this equation, predict profit for COGS = 100000 (26776.6990)
4) using this equation, predict profit for COGS = 200000 (46658.4740)




In Tableau, Blue color is used to indicate dimensions while Green color is used to indicate measures.

3 types of sorting the data in columns - 
1) Ascending
2) Descending 
3) Default (Data source)



1) Joins (old technique to join tables before 2020)

2) Relationship (new technique to join tables after 2020)







3 components of Tableau-
1. Worksheet
2. Dashboard
3. Story

Nine sections on home page
1. Dimension
2. Measure
3. Pages
4. Filter
5. Marks
6. Rows
7. Columns
8. Canvas
9. Show Me

Four layout styles in Tableau -
1. Standard
2. Fit height
3. Fit width
4. Entire view

Profit by Region & Order Priority (Text table)

1) Shipping cost by Region & Segment (Text table)
2) Sales by Region & Category (Text table)
3) Quantity by Sub-category & Ship Mode (Text table)



1) Average quantity by Region
2) Average shipping cost by Sub-category & Order priority

How to convert a dimension into count?
Normal count vs Distinct count
COUNT() vs COUNTD()

1) No. of products by Region & Segment
2) No. of customers by Market & Category



1) Profit by Sub-category & Order priority (Highlight table)
2) Average shipping cost by Region & Category (Highlight table)
3) Average quantity by Region & Ship Mode (Highlight table)
4) No. of orders by Market & Order Priority (Highlight table)
5) No. of customers by Region & Segment (Highlight table)

Diverging Colors

Highlight all records having quantity more than 3500.

1) Build highlight table of Shipping cost by Region & Category. Highlight the values having shipping cost > 50000.

2) Build highlight table of quantity by Sub-category & Ship Mode. Highlight the values having quantity > 5000.







1) Profit % Pie chart by Category
2) Quantity % Pie chart by Segment
3) Profit % Pie chart by Ship Mode
4) Shipping cost % Pie chart by Market
5) Profit % Pie chart by Market
6) Quantity % Pie chart by Order Priority


1) Profit by Region (Bubble chart)
2) Quantity by Region (Bubble chart)
3) Shipping cost by Country (Bubble chart)
4) Profit by Country (Bubble chart)
5) Profit by Sub-category (Bubble chart)
6) No. of customers by Sub-category (Bubble chart)
7) No. of products by Region (Bubble chart)
8) No. of orders by Sub-category (Bubble chart)

Bar chart has three varieties in Tableau -
1. Regular
2. Stacked
3. Side-by-side

Regular bar chart is used with single dimension. Stacked & Side-by-side bar charts are used with multiple dimensions.







1) Sales by Region (Bar chart)
2) Profit by Sub-category (Bar chart)
3) Profit by Region (Bar chart)
4) Quantity by Sub-category (Bar chart)
5) Shipping cost by Region (Bar chart)
6) No. of orders by Sub-category (Bar chart)
7) No. of orders by Region (Bar chart)
8) Profit by Country (Bar chart)


Using the bar chart, highlight all sub-categories having shipping cost above 100k.



Quantity by Region

1. No. of customers by Sub-category
2. No. of products by Sub-category

Shipping cost % by Market & Segment (Stacked bar)
Profit % by Market & Category (Stacked bar)

Two types of Line charts -
1. Discrete - Here the time period is considered as single level e.g. month, year, quarter etc.

2. Continuous - Here the time period is considered with Year e.g. month-year or quarter-year.

Discrete date - Blue
Continuous date - Green

Quarterly Profit (Discrete line)
Quarterly Quantity (Discrete line)
Quarterly No. of orders (Discrete line)

Monthly Profit (Discrete line)
Monthly no. of products (Discrete line)
Monthly No. of orders (Discrete line)

Quarterly Shipping Cost (Continuous line)

Monthly Profit (Continuous line)
Monthly No. of orders (Continuous line)
Monthly No. of customers (Continuous line)

Annual quantity by Market
Annual no. of products by Market

Quarterly no. of orders (Discrete area)


Monthly Profit by Segment (Continuous area)
Monthly Profit by Ship Mode (Continuous area)
Monthly Profit by Order Priority (Continuous area)

44538 records out of 51290 i.e. 87% records have sales value between 0 to 500.

4126 out of 51290 i.e. 8% records have sales value between 500 to 1000.

Within Consumer segment, 23071 records have sales between 0 to 500.
Within Corporate segment, 13356 records have sales between 0 to 500.
Within Home office segment, 8111 records have sales between 0 to 500.

Profit Histogram by Category (Bin size 100)

Quantity Histogram by Ship Mode (Bin size 1)

Sales vs Profit scatter plot

(Profit depends on Sales so Profit is Y variable and Sales is X variable)

Two types of scatter plot
1. With aggregation - used to compare individual values
2. Without aggregation - used to find predictive equation


Shipping cost vs Profit scatter plot by Sub-category


Canada :

R square is 0.81 i.e. 81% change in Y variable is due to change in X variable. Remaining 19% change can be due to unknown reasons.

R square (Coefficient of determination)
 
Canada = 0.81
APAC = 0.27
LATAM = 0.19
US = 0.23
EU = 0.22
Africa = 0.37 
EMEA = 0.11

Shipping cost vs Profit Scatter plot by Market (Trend Line)

Profit by Region Box Plot
Quantity by Region Box Plot
Sales by Sub-category Box Plot
Profit by Sub-category Box Plot
Profit by Country Box Plot

Quantity by Country & Market 
Box plot

There are two types of Geo maps in Tableau -
1. Symbol
2. Solid (Choropleth)

e.g. Country, State/province, County, City, Airport


Profit by Country (Symbol map)
Use dual color scheme - positive & negative

Shipping cost by Country (Symbol map)
Quantity by Country (Symbol map)

Profit by Country (Solid map)
Use dual color scheme - positive & negative

Shipping cost by Country (Solid map)
Quantity by Country (Solid map)

Two types of Treemap - 
1. Without group
2. With group








Profit by Sub-category (Treemap)
Quantity by Sub-category (Treemap)
Sales by Region (Treemap)
Profit by Region (Treemap)
Sales by Country (Treemap)


Profit by Sub-category Group by Category (Treemap)
Shipping cost by Sub-category Group by Category (Treemap)
Profit by Country Group by Market (Treemap)
Quantity by Country Group by Market (Treemap)


Actual vs Expected profit by State (Bullet graph)
Filters in Tableau -
1. Data Source
2. Dimension
3. Measure
4. Date
5. Quick
6. Top N
7. Context


Top 10 customers by Profit

Top 15 customers by Quantity (tree map)
Top 20 products by Profit (bubble chart)
Top 10 products by Quantity (vertical bar)
Bottom 12 countries by Shipping cost (solid map)

Parameter - used to provide dynamic selection of values during filter
data types of parameter - string, float, integer, date, boolean


Build bar graph of top 10 customers by sales. Create a new parameter "Top N customers" using Range option - 8 to 20 with step size 2 and use here. 

1) Quantity totals & subtotals by Category, Sub-category & Segment
2) Shipping cost totals & subtotals by Category, Sub-category & Order Priority

Groups -
Tableau allows to create custom groups of dimension values. It can be used to highlight the values within treemap.

1) Build treemap of sub-category & quantity. Add custom sub-category group on color to create groups. Add Segment as filter and show it on the right side (single value list)

2) Build treemap of sub-category & shipping cost. Add custom sub-category group on color to create groups. Add Market as filter and show it on the right side (single value list)

Using Region field, create 4 custom groups as below -
Region Group 1 - East,Africa, Central Asia, Oceania
Region Group 2 - EMEA, Canada, South, North Asia
Region Group 3 - Central, Caribbean
Region Group 4 - West, North, Southeast Asia
Then build yearly line chart of no. of orders and add these groups on Color.

Build treemap of region & no. of customers. Then add region custom group on color.

Hierarchy- It allows user to group the fields in a hierarchial order i.e. top to bottom. Hierarchy field is identified by a "+" symbol.

e.g. Year-Quarter-Month-Day


1) Create a hierarchy "Customer Details" using two fields - Customer ID & Customer Name.
Build bar chart using this hierarchy field & Profit.

2) Create a hierarchy "Product Details" using two fields - Product ID & Product Name.
Build bar chart using this hierarchy field & Quantity.  

Sets - It is a collection of values that are inside a set or outside a set. A set can be used as filter with only two options - IN & OUT. It is usually used to compare the values inside the set vs outside the set e.g. Top 10 customers vs remaining customers etc.

Create a set of top 20 products by quantity. Then build pie chart of IN vs OUT using this set.

Table calculations - 
1. Running total
2. Difference
3. % difference
4. Rank
5. Moving average (Line smoothening technique)


Monthly Quantity difference
(apply Market as filter)

Monthly Sales % difference
(Apply Region filter - single value list)
Find out hightest positive % values for following regions - 
West, East, South & North and compare them.


Profit ranking by Region & Segment
(Apply Order date year filter)

Reference line

Create vertical bar chart of region & profit. Then build a reference line using new parameter "Range - Profit by Region" with min = 25k, max = 300k & step size = 25k.

Analytics -
1. Constant line
Build bar chart of sub-category & sales. Add two constant lines - 500k & 1300k and find no. of sub-categories between them.

2. Average line

Countries having shipping cost & profit above average

3. Trend line

4. Forecasting

Additive model vs Multiplicative model
TCSI (Trend, Cyclic, Seasonal, Irregular)

1) Monthly Profit Forecasting for next 12 months  (use Market as filter)
2) Monthly Quantity Forecasting for next 14 months (use Region as filter)
3) Monthly Shipping cost Forecasting for next 15 months (use Segment as filter)

5. Clustering
K-means clustering (Centroid)

1) Sales vs Profit by Region Clusters (use category as filter)
2) Shipping cost vs Profit by Sub-category Clusters (use Market as filter)
3) Shipping cost vs Profit by Region Clusters (use Segment as filter)


Calculated fields in Tableau is a technique to create custom calculations using measures & dimensions for dashboards. They are mostly used for KPI.
Two types of calculated fields-
1. Without parameter
2. With parameter

Average Sales
Average Profit
Average Quantity
Average Shipping cost
No. of orders
No. of products
No. of customers
No. of countries
No. of Cities
Profit Ratio



1) Build treemap of sub-category & average sales.
2) Build bubble chart of region & average profit
3) Build vertical bar chart of Market & no. of orders
4) Create solid map of Country & No. of cities
5) Create symbol map of Country & No. of customers.
6) Build continuous monthly line chart of Order date & average quantity 

7) Create solid map of country & profit ratio and filter it using Market.
8) Create treemap of sub-category & profit ratio and filter it using Region.
9) Create bubble chart of region & profit ratio and filter it using Order date year.

How to use parameter inside calculated field?
1) First create the parameter with necessary options
2) Then create a new calculated field that uses parameter
3) In the calculated field code, check the parameter values using IF condition for decision making
4) Finally use this field on the chart instead of regular measure or dimension

Dynamic measures by Region (Tree map)
Dynamic measures by Country (Solid map)


Category
Market
Order Priority
Region
Segment
Ship Mode

Using this parameter & calculated field, build tree map of No. of orders 

Discount status
1) if discount 0 then print "No discount"
2) if discount is above 0 but below or equal 0.25 then print "Low discount"
3) if discount is above 0.25 but below or equal 0.50 then print "Medium discount"
4) if discount is above 0.5 but below or equal 0.75 then print "High discount"
5) if discount is above 0.75 then print "Maximum discount"

Profit Status
If profit < 0 then "Loss" 
otherwise "Profit"

Word cloud
1. Place your dimension on Text button.
2. Make it entire view.
3. Change Marks card Automatic to Text.
4. Drag the measure on Size button.
5. Drag dimension on Color button.

Profit by Region Word Cloud (filter by Segment)
Quantity by Country Word Cloud (filter by Market)
No. of orders by Sub-category Word Cloud (filter by Ship Mode)


Avg Sales
Avg Profit
Avg Quantity
Avg Discount
Profit Ratio
No. of orders
No. of customers
No. of products
No. of cities

Avg profit per order
Avg profit per product
Avg profit per customer


Superstore_project

Components of Dashboard - 
1. Horizontal
2. Vertical
3. Image
4. Blank
5. Web page
6. Navigation
7. Download


1) Pie chart using Segment & Profit
2) Pie chart using Category & Profit
3) Pie chart using Ship Mode & Profit
4) Pie chart using Order Priority & Profit
5) Horizontal bar chart of Sub-category & Sales
6) Horizontal bar chart of Region & Quantity
7) Vertical bar chart of Market & Shipping cost
8) Vertical bar chart of Market & Avg Discount
9) Continuous quarter line chart of profit
10) Continuous quarter line chart of sales
11) Discrete monthly area chart of quantity
12) Geographic Solid map of countries (don't use any measure.. just show countries)
13) Treemap of Sub-category & No. of orders
14) Treemap of Sub-category & No. of customers
15) Treemap of Region & No. of products
16) Top 10 Countries by Profit ratio (Bubble chart)
17) Sales vs Profit scatter plot with Trend line (remove aggregate measure) 
18) Quantity histogram (bin size 1)
19) Box plot using Sub-category & Profit




Market Shipping cost & Avg Discount by Sub-cat Dashboard


https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ France
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Argentina

Open a new dashboard
Use state solid map of US
Add a web page to show US state wikipedia page

LOD (Level of Detail) Expressions -
1. Fixed - based on date, based on dimension
2. Include
3. Exclude



1) Quantity by Order Priority
After creating LOD, in new worksheet, add Order priority in rows & then ship mode to check the total

2) Average Profit by Country
After creating LOD, in new worksheet, add Country first & then State to check the results


Highlight country by Market & filter KPI Dashboard


Data blending is a technique in Tableau to join the data coming from different types of sources e.g. TXT, CVS, XLS, Oracle, SQL Server etc. It requires min. two types of datasources - Primary & Secondary. Any dataset selected first on the sheet automatically becomes Primary and others become Secondary. For successful data blending, there must be atleast one common column necessary to join Primary & Secondary.

----------------------------------------------
Story can created using a worksheet or dashboard. But dashboard can't be created using Story.

Each story is created by adding story points similar to a slide in PPT file.

Create a story in Superstore project for country = US.
Build following charts -
1. build any two charts for Sales
2. build any two charts for Profit
3. build any two charts for Quantity
4. build any two charts for No. of orders
5. build any two charts for No. of customers
6. build any two charts for Profit ratio

and add these charts one by one in a story - "US Business Analysis"




What's the difference between "New Column" & "New Measure"?

New Measure is single aggregate value using SUM, AVERAGE etc. e.g. Total sales, Average profit etc.

New column - here the formula is calculated for every row e.g. unit price * quantity



1) Productwise no. of orders (Bar chart)



Quarterly Freight by Category Ribbon chart

Sales by Customer Tree map

1) Freight by Country
2) Sales by Country
3) Discount by Country





